[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Alexander Shulgin--
Sasha, to his friends--
is nothing less
than the godfather
of psychopharmacology, an
expert on the cyclocized
phenethylamines,
that is, psychoactive
compounds useful in
the emotional recovery
of traumatic events.
Shulgin has given his life to
the study of the pharmacology
of the psychedelic experience.
In Prague, he told me,
"greater frontiers lie ahead."
The next lost continent to be
explored by Alexander Shulgin,
the psychoactive tryptamines.
Sasha suggested that I join him
for a stroll among the graves
of the cemetery of the
Jewish Ghetto of Prague,
Europe's oldest ghetto.
There, walking among the stones,
we reminisced and speculated
about the history and the
future of psychopharmacology.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
What do you make of your
Russian colleagues here?
>> I'm fascinated
by what he's doing,
and I am intrigued by his
ability to get out what he is
doing into the West because the
status of a physician record is
not what we have come
to respect in the West.
>> You're talking about
Yevgeny Trepinski--
>> Mhm.
>> I imagine you don't
view ketamine with--
well, how do you view ketamine?
>> It's a-- it's an anesthetic
and it's a dissociative thing.
And it puts me out of body.
>> It's very dissociative.
It puts me out of mind.
>> Just, you're away.
And I, frankly, with a full
bladder, like being here.
And you suddenly realize that
someone has a full bladder,
and there's only one
intellectual level.
You realize it's you.
>> Ah, yes.
No, it's seriously
disassociated me
that I felt it was a great
victory when I finally
realized that this was a drug.
For a long time, I couldn't
figure out what it was
or who was even
asking the question.
>> We kept calling it Vitamin
K, which is a fascinating
euphemism for allowing-- to
have some symptoms of a food
additive for a
dietary supplement.
But--
>> Well, I think--
>> I had the interesting
pleasure of being back at a big
company in the East the day
they had bought the rights
to distribute ketamine.
And I informed
them, you do realize
that ketamine is being
made by Park Davis
and shipped off to Mexico.
And it's imported in gallon--
not gallon, but liter
bottles, all with a percentage
of preservative.
And it comes right
back into California
in the trunk of the car.
Oh, about 20 years
ago, there was
a class of compounds
called quinuclidines.
And for about three
of four years,
I just noticed that
there's no publishing
in the Russian
literature whatsoever
on the quinuclidines.
Then, all of a sudden, the
Russian literature here
started publishing, and
then we went into a--
sort of a gap.
And then quinuclidine
benzylate, which
is one of the most potent
of the anticholinergics,
was suddenly revealed that the
Russians were working on it
as a chemical warfare agent.
And then we were working
on it as a defense
against their chemical
warfare agent.
>> Uh-huh.
>> And it was active--active
10, 20 micrograms.
>> 10, 20 micrograms.
>> Micrograms, yeah.
It make you really wonky,
just like atropine.
Delusion, confusion.
>> Uh-huh.
>> But they designed these
fantastic bombs that they can
explode and send out millions
of little hypodermic needles.
And so they don't have
to worry about wind
blowing it downwind or upwind.
>> So it's essentially a
chemical cluster bomb of some
sort.
>> Cluster bomb, but with
little hypodermic needles.
>> So that's probably
in the inventory.
>> It's already
>> Uh-huh.
Well, I-- someone
mentioned to me
that you had
expressed interest now
that you felt you had sort
of done the work you wanted
to do with cyclocized
phenethylamines
and that you were going back
to looking at tryptamines.
>> Very much so.
That's the other
side of the coin.
There's this rich and
unexplored areas of Netherlands
were 20 years ago.
>> So are you going to
illuminate it for us, and--
>> Oh, absolutely.
I've already made the
t-butyl, t-butyl methyl.
Isopropyl methyl is well-known,
but the secondary butyl methyl
is not known.
They're all active by smoking.
>> Uh-huh.
And what-- are they--
could do, in a blind test,
pick one out from another?
Or are they sort of--
>> Don't know yet.
I don't know yet.
I doubt it, somehow.
I think they're all going to be
fast, impactful, and all very
much like DMT.
>> Duration-wise, or--
>> Duration-wise.
>> --presentationally.
>> And probably, perhaps,
a little bit more potent.
>> A little bit more potent?
>> Yeah, because DMT is
not that all fired potent.
It takes, you know,
10, 20, 50-- no, more--
50, 100 milligrams.
>> 50 to 70 milligrams.
>> Yeah.
And some of these, we're
getting into, maybe, at 30--
20 to 30 milligrams.
But not active orally.
We have to get up to a
certain degree of shrubbery,
on the knife, when
you get oral activity.
>> And how many of these
compounds do you imagine there
are that are simple variants?
>> At, casually, you
could make 30, 40, 50.
>> Why do you suppose it
is that this fast-acting,
easily manufactured, spectacular
hallucinogen is so rarely met
in the underground?
>> I don't know.
I've heard that there is--
it's there, in some quantity.
I heard about a
seizure in Boston,
I believe, it was of ayahuasca
And they seized it on the basis
that it contained DMT.
>> Right.
That was the Santo
Daime people--
>> Oh, yes.
>> --from Brazil.
>> Brazil.
>> But, you know, we live in a
society where people jump out
of airplanes and hang by
bungee cords over bridges.
And DMT, which is always
described as a easy synthesis--
>> Extremely easy.
>> --is just not--
not there.
It's--
>> I have no idea.
>> It violates one of
these economic laws of--
>> Basic laws of--
>> Gresham or
Graham or somebody.
Something that I've always
wanted to ask you, which is,
unlike me, you seem
remarkably resistant to what
I call the implications.
I mean, how can you just do
these things over and over
again and not be
nutty as a fruit cake?
>> So--
>> Well, are you?
Are you?
>> I think so.
I think I'm relaxed
at any event.
>> But, unlike me, you don't
feel the need to rave about
that aspect of it?
>> Not particularly.
I'd rather quietly
stay half in the closet
and continue to
doing what I'm doing.
>> But you do--
you've probably seen more
uncharted internal landscape
than half of mankind
put together.
I mean, that would not
be an immodest claim.
>> They're a little
bit charted now.
>> Well, a very little bit.
>> Very little, that's right.
But the seeds are there
to be used by anyone else.
That's the reason
for the book, just
to get it all recorded
into a documented form.
>> But it always puzzles me.
I mean, I think Hoffman
and Wasson and, certainly,
to some degree, Schultes--
to some degree, you--
nobody want-- everybody
says, well, I'm
just a humble botanist or I'm
just a hard-working workbench
chemist.
Nobody wants to
actually say, this
must be very, very important.
Because it's so uniquely
beyond ordinary expectation.
>> Yes, but the importance
is going to take a long time
to realize.
What you can't build
without the tools,
and you have to have the tools,
and these are the tools that
allow the building to be done.
I'm not a builder.
I'm a toolmaker.
And that's probably
one of the reasons
I have not described a
lot of the landscapes.
I don't see them differently.
>> If we could compare it to
the invention of the telescope,
probably within 50 years of
the major solar system new
paradigms were put in place.
This seems very elusive.
It seems hard for us to go
beyond simply saying it exists,
it's really far out.
And then we sort of fall silent.
What do you think about that?
>> I think the
silence is, in part,
imposed upon us by a very
unsympathetic authority body.
And maybe it's just as well.
Because, that way,
a lot of work can
be done and sort of
recorded for posterity.
And the time the pendulum
swing, they all swing back.
And the time will come when
this work will be used--
research will be done
with these tools that
will be of great value.
>> Well, obviously, you
believe in it strongly.
What would you say
to a critic who said,
what's so great about this?
Are you and your friends
in any significant way
different from the
rest of humanity?
>> No.
And I don't see why
it would be critical.
I'm not offending him.
I can see no way in that
which I'm offending him.
I'm quietly doing my little
alchemist thing at home.
>> But you really must think
that it does make a difference.
>> I think it does.
I think it will.
>> It will.
>> I don't think it does now.
>> So we really are cursed
with being pioneers.
>> Yeah.
I like it.
>> It's not so bad.
>> No.
>> It has a nice feel to it.
>> I mean, they'll hang your
picture in the main hall years
hence and say,
these were giants.
>> I would rather have my
picture hanging in the main
hall than me hanging
in the main hall.
>> Well, some
people manage both.
>> Both.
That's true.
>> And you may end
up that way too.
>> Oh, well.
It's a short, happy life.
It's kind of neat.
>> Well, you've--
>> But this is
your territory too.
What's your feeling?
Do you feel that that's
a fair feeling, or--
>> I think that I have always,
from the very first psychedelic
experience, had the uncanny
intuition that, yes,
this has been around
for 50,000 years,
but it's somehow going to
be critically important
in our lifetime.
That we will need
it for something,
maybe just to think
our way out of the mess
that we're getting into.
>> Well, OK.
But if it's needed, we have it.
>> Yes.
>> Well, that's the beauty.
The tool is there for the
time when the need is obvious.
And this may be-- it
may be our lifetime.
>> So, essentially, what you're
doing is you're placing tools
on the shelf--
screwdrivers for screws that
haven't been invented yet.
>> Haven't been
made--exactly that.
Except it's a good tool.
Its use will depend
upon someone who
has that particular view of me.
>> Well, it's a wonderful thing.
Where do you hope to be in 10
years, or so, with all of this?
Have you ever--
>> Probably starting
on a third book.
>> Do you think--
I know you're working on
a book about legalization.
>> Not actually.
I'm working with a group
who is, more or less, funded
to make arguments
that would be raised--
to address arguments to be
raised in the legalization
process.
What would the answer of how
drugs would be legalized?
How would they be
made available?
Should it be an
open supermarket?
Or should it be under some
sort of governmental control?
And it's a research-- more
than that-- a policy group.
>> Study.
>> It's setting up for that.
I think it's futile
in the present state.
>> In terms of practical impact.
>> Yeah.
I don't think anyone is
going to seriously entertain
legalization.
So it's a-- it may
be a field process,
but it's a fun process.
Because, in the process
you're beginning
evaluating your own relationship
with drug laws, drug
regulations, drug control.
>> If you were in charge of it,
how do you see it happening?
I mean, are there drugs
you would keep legal?
Or do you think it should be--
>> What I would do,
if I were running it,
I would keep certain laws
that would protect people
of innocence.
I would have absolutely
no drug with children
who are of too young an age.
God knows what that age may be.
>> So 16, 19, 21--
>> Oh, perhaps.
Maybe alcohol might.
>> Right.
>> Absolutely unallowed
giving drugs to anyone without
their consent.
>> Naturally.
>> Informed consent,
knowledge, education.
I would make
absolutely available,
at all levels of propaganda,
restriction, information
that is factual about drugs.
Then I'd open a drugstore.
And you people--
would they overuse?
Maybe.
But I think that very
quickly dampen itself
down to maybe about
what we have now.
But do a-- remove
the criminality,
remove the violence, remove the
entire social disruptiveness
that these drug
laws have caused.
>> Would you encourage the
government to see these drugs
as a vehicle for
gaining tax revenue?
Or do you think the government
should stay off that?
>> Probably-- probably some
tax revenue would be valid,
as with other drugs of
abuse, other things of abuse.
>> Similarly to alcohol--
>> Similarly--
>> --and tobacco.
>> It's a good model.
It's a good model.
And, perhaps, it's a valid one.
>> Well, that's pretty much what
I suggested in my book that I
agree with you that it's easy
to sit down and come up with
a fine plan overcoming
the political hurdles
of an American--
>> Too many people have too much
to benefit on the laws being
what they are and even
becoming more intense.
And until you change that
motivation-- that reward--
>> Yes, well, the most cynical
and the most naive people
in America are keeping
the drug problem going.
The most cynical, by
dealing and importing
drugs and the most naive
through the kind of Christian
terror of--
>> Look at the monstrous
industries that have been built
up with it.
The drug urine screening.
Shameful.
>> Right.
>> But they're
multibillion dollar things.
This kit, that GCMS,
this instrumentation,
these people who make
little wax urine bottles.
It's becoming-- there's
no justification for urine
screening at any
time, of anyone,
under any circumstance
on a random basis.
None.
>> Well, and the notion that
in a democratic society people
would get into that kind
of thing, it's incredible,
I think.
>> It's completely contrary to
the principles of our society--
the assumption of innocence.
We blew it, because it's
not in the Constitution.
>> Right.
>> It should have been
in there, but it wasn't.
>> Right.
>> But taking a urine sample on
a random basis is an assumption
of guilt. That's intolerable.
>> Well, but what is in the
Bill of Rights is life, liberty,
and the pursuit of happiness.
>> No, the Declaration
of Independence.
>> Declaration of Independence.
But that could be used--
>> It could be.
It could be part--
>> --as a sufficient basis for.
>> It's a form of self image.
And we should maintain
the deception.
>> Yeah.
Well, the first thing that
goes when society hits the wall
is democracy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]